What's your name? José López. José López, and you?
Ignacia Izaguirre de López. And your town?
Irapuato. And your town? Here, Tamaulipas.
Tamaulipas, and what town? San Carlos. San
Carlos.
And what town is near San Carlos? Ciudad Victoria.
Ah, Ciudad Victoria.
Well, how old are you? Sixty-ninety-two.
Ninety-two. And you? Sixty-seven.
And what year were you here in Texas? The 10th. The
10th? 1910. 1910. And you? In 1928. In 1928? She got
married after she got here.
How old
were you when you left Mexico? I was...
Nineteen. Eighty-four. No, not... Eighty-one.
1881. 1881. But 19 is 19 and 10 is...
You were born in 1881 and you came, left Mexico in
1910. So you were nearly 30 years old. Casi 30 años.
29. 29 años cuando salió de México. 20. For what
reason do you come here to the United States? Why
did you come here? Life
in Mexico
is very expensive.
In these years? And what kind of work do you have in
Mexico? I had. You had? Just sowing. Sowing. In
your own land? No. No? In the middle. In the middle?
For a owner? Yes. In the city of Iropuato or near?
Pueblo
Nuevo Pueblo Nuevo
That's the name of the town.
Steven. When did
you come to Texas? Where did you live in the first
place in 1910?
I lived in a shop called Tomelope's. I was working
in a farm in Medes. In Medes with my husband. Sowing
corn. Here in Texas? No. No, over there. Over
there. But here, when did you come here? Here I was
sowing. I was sowing all over the place. I was
working in the railroad for about five years. And
then I learned how to work the cart, how to work the
cart. There is a lot of work in the cart. It was very
hard at that time. Now there is machinery to work
naturally. There wasn't before. Before you could
work with pure strength. Yes.
And for what reason do you come to Texas and not from
California or another part of the United States?
Because here it's more immediate. It's more
immediate to go to Texas. To go there it's very,
very far. Yes? Yes. And in what way do you come? By
paella? By train? No, on the train. One comes to
Laredo and pays one or two reales and they let him go
home. They paid? Yes, they paid two reales. They
paid one or two reales to go to this side. Yes.
And for what reason do they come to Bryant? We came
to live here and then we bought the house here. We
bought the house here and we were working very
hard. I had a big family. I had no money. I went to
Hueas and from there I brought 200, 300 pesos and
with that we lived here. I had a lot of family. A lot
of big boys. And where did you meet your wife? Where
did you meet your wife? Here, in Franklin. In
Franklin? And why were you in Franklin?
My older sister lived here. Yes. And from Mexico, I
came here. Yes. Franklin. Franklin. And then they
met there. Yes. In what year did her sister come
here? 1910. 1910.
For what reason did she come here? She came here.
They came to look for
work to live more. Yes. Better?
And how did they get here? By train? No, in those
years it was by train. There was no other way. In
Laredo, there are men who hire people and bring
them here. And that's how they get here. And are
there problems with the revolution in your town
when they come to the United States? No. No? Or why?
It's already happened. When we came here, they
only paid one for the bridge, you know, two reals,
and they only paid one for this. And here, since
it's more... Life is more forbidden. The children
come here and
don't come back. I haven't returned to the banks of
the river. Life is very hard over there. Life is
very hard over there. All you can do is plant corn.
Plant corn with mules, in the middle of the field.
We moved here and it was very comfortable because I
had a big family and we made ourselves live better.
That's why we moved here. Did you come with your
family or alone? Alone. I came alone. Do you have
relatives there at the airport? I had, who knows
now, for so long, already 92 years. 92 years. And
you never came back to visit there? No. No, why not?
I just enjoyed the river. Because I didn't like it
there anymore. Life was very hard. You like life
here in the United States more? Yes. For what
reasons? Sí, porque traigo mucha familia,
¿sabes? Yo me ganaba muy buen dinero. No tenías
familia entonces. Tenía como, creo que eran tres,
¿no? Ramón y Cande. Eso fue después que nos
casaron. Cuando él entró para acá, andaba solo.
Sí. Y ganaba... And your money was paid by whoever
did the work. And you, you lived in your town during
the revolution,
right? Yes, I was a girl. Do you remember anything
like this? Well... I remember when the... The
Pancho Viña war. He tried to go to the capital. But
in the haciendas there were groups of soldiers.
And they were the ones who were doing evil. And
that's what I remember. They tried to take away the
rich man. To give him to the poor. They killed cows,
sheep, and the meat was distributed to the people
who were in the farm or town. That's what they did.
But your family spent all this time in your town,
right? Yes. They didn't go to the United States.
But your sister did. My sister was here. Yes. That
was in 900... 13, 14. Yes. And are there soldiers in
your town? During the Revolution, were there
soldiers in your town? Well, in each place there
was a group of soldiers because they kept the
enemies from entering. Yes. And what kind of work
did your father have? I don't remember. I was very
young when he died. And your mother? Me too. I was
four when my father died and I wasn't eight when my
mother died. And after that, who do you live with?
With an aunt. An aunt? What's your aunt's name?
Good afternoon. Do you want to talk to
her? Talk to her? About Mexico. She's recording.
About Mexico? Why did you come here? It's to make
the history of the people who live here in Texas
better. Why did you come here? I don't know what to
say. I know that I live better here than in Mexico.
What? I live better here than in Mexico. Are you in
Mexico? Is it better here? It's better here. Do you
know Mexico? Yes, I know it. What part? Oh, many
parts. I don't remember. I can tell you that I know
many parts of Mexico, but I don't like it. No? I'm
Mexican. Yes. But I don't like it. There's no life
there. There's no life? Well, there's life, but
there's no work. Ah. If you want to live, you have to
live a very poor life. Yes. In Mexico, they give
jobs to men aged 20 to 40, 45. Then, if they have to
live, they live. And if they don't...
See? Yes. A young boy, there is never work. Yes. He
has to walk around the street selling tortillas,
selling this or something to get a cent. Yes, but is
there a lot of work here? Here, yes.
Is he your son? No. Who is he? He's the only one. He's
the only boy that's here. Sometimes he's here,
sometimes he's there. But he works. Is he a
relative or just a friend? Does he live here with
you? Yes, and
Brian? No.
On one side of Franklin. Yes. And what year did you
come here, Brian? Forty... Fifty. Forty-nine.
Forty-nine in November. And for how many years did
you live near Franklin?
All the time. From 1930 to... And what kind of work
did you have there? Work. Work. I used to work in the
farm. At first, you know, take care of the cows. I
worked in the farm, lived in the farm. Do you want me
to speak to you in Spanish? Because she's... I
don't speak Spanish. I don't speak Spanish. I
speak English, too. Me too. Let them hear what
you're saying. Oh, yes. Just a moment. You come
here, you came here... I'm here. But you came here
in 1901? In 1902? No, no, no, no. In 61. I came here.
From which part? From which town? From the city of
Acuña, Coahuila. Yes. And is it the town of your mom
and dad? No. No? Where is this town? The city of
Victoria, Tamaulipas. The city of Victoria, in
the city. Ah, in the city. Yes. And why did you come
here? Why did you come here? Well, first of all, I
came... Well, there's something I shouldn't say.
But... I don't have a father in Mexico.
I have a mother. My mother lives with another man.
That man doesn't love me. When I got to my age, I
couldn't live with them. I understood that I
couldn't live with them. I can make... I have to
speak English. Well, I came here to look for my
life. Yes.
And did you have relatives here in Texas? Yes, I
have relatives in San Antonio. Yes. They are from
my mother's house. Yes. But I liked
it here in Texas, how I worked. My bosses liked how I
worked. The work I did, they paid for it. And they
were satisfied. So I liked Texas. I had money to
spend, to go whenever I wanted. And I never went
back to Mexico.
No. You want more
here? I want more Texas than Mexico. It's not that
I'm not Mexican, I am Mexican. Yes. I do want Mexico
too. Yes. But I can't... I can't live in Mexico.
Yes. Because I can't do it. I'm more imposed here
than there. And for what reason do you come here?
Did you come here to work? No, for an interest. I
came to work, to make my life. Yes. To look for my
life. Yes. Here in this town. But why did you come to
Bryan, not San Antonio or San Marcos? Well, I was in
different towns. I was in San Angelo, Abilene, in
many towns. All of Texas, Oklahoma. I didn't
distinguish a town, just because. I liked this
town. When I came here to Bryan, all the people here
saw me very well. I have a lot of friends and they
love me as much as I love them. We've always
been one for each other. I'm not leaving this town
until I die. If not, I'm not leaving. It's a nice
town. I like it a lot. There aren't many Mexicans
like San Antonio. But it's more peaceful than San
Antonio. Yes, it's smaller. It's smaller and
there are fewer people. It's much more peaceful
than San Antonio. I lived
in San Antonio without my parents. I liked this
town and I think I'm going to stay here. What kind of
work do you have? I work in the Lincoln. All the work
that... I don't have work to do right now. I have
everything. I do everything. The same as him. He's
from here, I'm from there. I should do what he does
and I do it. With the time I have to be here, I never
learned to work in Mexico. I didn't know how to work
in Mexico because I never worked. This is where I
learned to work. Like right now. If I came to
Mexico, I would ask for work there. The work that I
have here, they didn't give it to me. They wanted me
to start from the bottom and then I would get to the
top. No, no, not that, dad. I didn't even doubt it
for about 15 years so that I could do it. But in
Mexico now there are more opportunities for
people than in the past? Yes, for those who have a
school, yes. But is it necessary to have a school?
It is necessary, yes. But the people who don't have
a school can't do anything. I only had six years of
school. Yes. That's all. There are people who have
12 years. Young people who have, like the families
of those who can't have money, they send them 12
years, and they have a good job. When they finish
school, they finish 20 years, and they get a good
job. And I couldn't
hold it. I'm very happy to be here in Texas. Well,
not just here in Texas, but all over the United
States. If I wasn't here, I'd be in another state,
like I was in my family. Is life very different here
in Mexico? It's very different. In what way is it
different? With the same job, in what way is it
different? No, no, no, in another way, not the job.
The job is different. But in another way, in
another way it's different. In another way I can't
like Texas. Yes? Because there are a lot of
festivities, a lot of festive days. And all that,
you walk around and everything. Here no, here it's
just the weekend, the sun. There in Mexico, no.
between the week and the weekend.
Every month we have a day, a holiday day. A lot of
parties.
A lot of parties. Mr. Lopez, are there a lot of
parties in Mexico during these years when you
lived there? Were there many parties in Mexico in
the past? Yes. What kind of parties? There were
dances and everything.
People would dance and enjoy the dance. There were
many. There aren't any here, but they're
different. People do it as they're used to it. Yes.
In your
town, Mr. Lopez, in your ranch, what day of the year
is the most important holiday? The 16th. The 16th
of September. Other days? Two days. Two days.
Fifteen and sixteen. Yes.
May 5th.
May 5th. February 24th. Yes. What's the day of the
flag? What's the
day of the flag? Flag Day. Flag Day. Yes. But there
are church holidays. Huh? There are church
holidays. Christmas
Day, all the December fruits, all days, all
nights. The Guadalupe Day. Guadalupe
Day.
Pastors all come to worship the Virgin of
Guadalupe. On December 12. Y cuando usted estaba
muy joven, viene a... Usted vive en rancho. En
rancho se llaman... La Hacienda de Guadalupe. La
Hacienda de Guadalupe. Y estaba cerca de...
Linares. De Linares. Ah, yes, I know Linares. Is it
on the side of the mountains or the sea? No, no, it's
close to Monterrey and Nuevo León. Well, I know
Linares and Monterrey. Well, it's close to
Monterrey. At four in the morning, I would leave
the house to get to the church at eight. Yes. On
foot. On foot. In those years there was no voice.
They had horses or carts. And they had nothing on
foot. On foot. They walked. From your farm to
Linares? To Linares. Two hours of walking. Yes.
Two hours. Quite a lot.
¿Y qué fue el pueblo más cerca de su hacienda?
Tome López. Tome López. Tome López. Y Tome
Lopillos. Son dos pueblos, dos ranchos juntos.
Sí. Uno está en un lado del camino y el otro al otro
lado. Sí. Tome López grande y Tome López chico. Sí.
¿Y usted vivía en...? No, no. Señor. El Señor.
Pueblo Nuevo. Pueblo Nuevo. Y cerca de estos
pueblos.
Y usted salió a los Estados Unidos antes de la
Revolución?
No, cuando... The Pancho Villa revolution was
going on, so I came here. I was ten years old. So I
came here, and I haven't come back, not even to the
shore of the river. I don't like it there anymore.
I'm already imposed here. You've been here for
more than ten years. I'd like to go back to Mexico.
I have my mother there. But it's very hard. She
doesn't like it there anymore. It's very hard to
live here. It's better to live here.
Pero durante estos años de la revolución, ¿su
familia tenía problemas o no? ¿Su familia en
México? No. No. No. ¿Por qué no? No, vivían en el
rancho. Sí. ¿Y no hay soldados o nada? No, había
soldados en el pueblo. En cada esquina hay uno. En
Darmes. Sí. En el pueblo, en cada esquina hay uno.
All night long. They are there with their lanterns
in the corners. And there are
many soldiers. Many soldiers in each corner. Who
knows
now, but now everything is more populated. There
in Mexico... When I was there, in every corner
there was a gendarme. With his lantern, day and
night. He was eating there. Who knows how it will be
now? I don't give him any reason. From Mexico to the
edge of the river, from the edge of the river to
here. I haven't been to Mexico.
And what kind of house did you live in in Mexico? A
house made of adobe, made of earth. How many rooms?
Two, three rooms, the kitchen and everything. Was
there electricity? But there was no electricity.
There were only lamps. Lamps like this one here.
Electricity
wasn't used
there. How many people lived in your ranch in
Mexico? No, it was a lot of people. A lot of people?
100 or 200? It was a big town. There were two towns
together. One was Tome López Grande and the other
was Tome López Chico. They were like here, but
there was only the street. And over there was a
ranch and over here was another one.
There was a lot of people.
Hello. Hello. I'm Mary Lee Nolan.
Look,
look! Where's Johnny? Hey,
Johnny!
What's up, Mommy? Nothing.
What time is it, honey? It's five. How
many children do you have? Well, I have several.
Five men. Five men? And six women. Six women? Oh,
eleven? Eleven children? And each child has six,
seven, five... Oh, you have many grandchildren.
Forty-one. Forty-one grandchildren.
And 16... How do you say it? Sons-in-law.
Sons-in-law? No, just daughters.
Oh, daughters. Stepdaughters. Ah, yes. There are
16 grandchildren. Yes. You are the second wife
of... And your first wife is from Mexico or from
here? From here. From here. Do you marry her after
you come to the United States? Yes. We'll be
waiting for you. For what? Yes. To win the food. How
do you fight? Look how she brings the boots. Didn't
she tell you what she did with the boots? Le dije que
fuera a poner la junta del calentón, ya ves como
andan mojadas ayer. He pones clothes to the heater
pa que se sequen. He put them on top of the heater.